Hopefully, you've got a good handle on all of the subnetting information that we've covered so far,
and you'd be able to work your way through a subnetting problem. But let's actually verify that now by
doing a practice question.
So the question is, what are the network address,
the broadcast address, and the valid host addresses for the IP address of 198.22.45.173/26?
And the second part of the question, what is the subnet mask in dotted decimal notation?
So stop the video now, please, and figure that out. When you come back, I'll walk you through how we arrive
at the answer.
Okay, so let's look at how we are going to figure out the answer to the question.
We're actually going to do the second part of the question first because it's more logical and easier
to do it that way.
The second part of the question was, what is the subnet mask, /26, in dotted decimal?
And the way to do this, whenever you're working out a subnetting problem, particularly at the start, is to write out the
bit pattern at the top of the piece of paper. Later on, you'll be able to do a lot of these in your head, but when
you're first learning, it's way easier to write it all out like this. So take a piece of paper,
and at the top, start off at the right, and write 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, and then you can put a dot in, and then
1, 2, 4, 8, and so on, until you've drawn out the bit pattern for the 4 octets in your subnet mask.
Then, the question that we had was we had to work out the dotted decimal notation for a /26.
So just under your bit pattern, at the top of the paper, write out 26
1's underneath that, and then, you can put in 6 0's for the host portion of the
address. Also, draw a line in where the line is for the subnet mask, and then we can just add these up.
So, obviously, the 1st octet is all 1's, it's going to be 255.
The 2nd octet is also going to be 255.
The 3rd octet is also 255.
And then, at the 4th octet, where we're doing the subnetting here, the 1's are in the 128 and the 64.
So, we add 128 and 64 together to give us 192.
So a /26 in dotted decimal notation is
255.255.255.192.
Let's look at what the second part of the question was.
What is the network address,
the broadcast address, and the valid host addresses for the IP address
198.22.45.173
/26?
So again, we use our piece of paper, and we're going to write out the IP address now as well.
You can see that I've done it on the top part here. That is the bit pattern for
198.22.45.173,
that's how we would write it in decimal. The network portion of the address is the first 26 bits,
so I can see that that is 198.22.45, and then I just count whatever is
in the first 2 bits here, and I've got a 1 for the 128 and a 0 for 64,
so that means it's 128.
So, the network address is 198.22.45.128.
Don't worry about the text yet. This is a second way that we can figure out the answer,
that I'll get to in a second.
I'm going to explain how to do it the long way first. The long way is the logical way to do it first,
where we write out the IP address and the subnet mask in binary notation, and we put in the line where the subnet
mask is. From that, we can figure out what the network address is. Like I just said 198.22.45.128,
I can see it here. Then we figure out what the broadcast address is, so that would be if we
had a 1 in all of the host bits. So that would be a 1 on the 32, up to the 1. And if
we add up 32 plus 16, plus 8, plus 4, plus 2, plus 1, so that's 32 plus 16
is 48, plus 8 is 56, plus 4 is 60, plus 2 is 62, plus 1 is 63.
So the network portion of the address was 198.22.45.128, 128 plus 63 is going to be 191.
Again, the network address is 192.22.45.128. The broadcast address
is 198.22.45.191. So we've got the network address and the broadcast address.
The possible host addresses are going to be the addresses that lie between those 2 numbers,
so that would be 198.22.45.129, going up to 198.22.45.190.
Okay, so that's how we can figure that out very manually and very logically. We can take
a little bit of a shortcut, and what we do is, again, you saw this in the last lecture, we look at where
the line is, so the line is here, after the 64. So, I know that my subnets go up in multiples
of 64. So the first one is going to be 198.22.45.0, then
198.22.45.64, then 198.22.45.128, and so on. I can see that this address that I'm interested
in is 198.22.45.173. So first subnet is 198.22.45.0, then 198.22.45.64, then 198.22.45.128.
The next one would be 128 plus 64, which is going be 198.22.45.192. 198.22.45.173
is less than 198.22.45.192, so it must be in the 198.22.45.128 network. I know this is this is in the network
198.22.45.128. I then add on 64, I know to add on 64 because that's where the line
is, and the next network address would be 198.22.45.192. So the next network address is 198.22.45.192. It must mean that
the broadcast address for this subnet is 1 less than that, it's going to be 198.22.45.191. So there, I've figured out my
network address is 198.22.45.128. I figured out that my broadcast address is 198.22.45.191. The available hosts must be
everything in between,
that would be 198.22.45.129 to 198.22.45.190.
Okay, so that is how we can figure it out.
And a final important point to tell you here is, notice that everything was done on where the subnet line is,
and in this example is at /26, so that is in the last octet. So, we don't actually need to worry about
the first 3 octets. They're always going to be unchanged as 198.22.45
in our example. So you can save some time by only writing out the octet that the subnetting is happening on. You don't
have to write the whole thing out in full every time. Okay, so that was a quick example of how we will solve
a subnetting question, the kind of thing that you would see on the CCNA exam.